# Introduction to Learning

## Learning as a skill.
### What exactly is learning?
> By Me : 
> Learning is about knowing a thing, it differ from studying in many aspect like,
> - Learning is only to absorb the concept. But to hone it. We need to study & practice it.

- Being open to new ideas & experience, & allowing ourselves to grow from what we encouter in the world.
- Is Learning - Studying? NO.
- Learning is being open to change.
- Learning is self - Growth.

> By my friends:
> - Chitwan Singh : It is a skill that help us to develop other skill.
> - Priyanshu Rai : Learning is gain of knowledge & skill that will helps to improve our attitude & behaviours.
> - Srajeta Gupta : Learning is the modification of behaviours as a result fo experience.

### What is Unlearning?
> By Me :
>  Unlearning is a way to learn new things and thinking.

- Unlearning is the process of dicarding something form  your memory when we unlearn something.
	- We forget it.
	- Put it aside, &
	- You lose knowledge of it.

> By my friends :
> - Shikhar Raj : Clearing the mind from previous learning.
> - Snehil Saini : Keep on learning but not forgetting, keeping side of previous learning.

### But why Unlearn?
For : 
- New perspective.
- New vision.
- To be more receptive.
- Get away with old habits.
- Make way for new ideas.

### Is UnLearning Pleasant?

> By Me :
> - Broadly speaking No.
> - But it depends like,
> -	If you are unlearning, a skill to acquire a new skill which is more popular in that perticular field. Then yes.
> - If you are unlearning a skill to acquire a new skill, which is not used in that perticular fields. Then No.



## Sync Activities
Activities : [[sync-activities1]]

## Asynchronous

Activities : [[async-15-10-2021]]
