# LC-Activities-III

## Activity-1 : Watch Video 12 Things That Ruin a First Impression Immediately

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JrbnTZPjg0k" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


> Scientists have proven that we form our first impression about someone within the first 7 seconds of meeting them.

#### Number-1 : The Wrong Attire.

> Statistics claim that 55 percent of the first impression, based on appearance.

#### Number-2 : Being Late.
#### Number-3 : Forgetting peoples names.
#### Number-4 : Constantly Checking your phone.

> A study form the university of `ESSEX`  showed that even just having one's phone on the table next to them, reduces a conversation's quality and the participant engagement.

#### Number-5 : Making distracting noises.

- It can be nearly impossible to control nervous tapping, but you have to try, especially during important meetings or presentations.

#### Number-6 : Invading someone's personal space.

> The space between you and another person depends on your relationship and the situation.

- When it comes to meeting someone for the first time, keep a minimum of `four feet` space between the two of you.

#### Number-7 : Picking the wrong conversation topics.
#### Number-8 : Playing with your hair.

A person who toys with their hair during a conversation, looks
- Unconfident.
- Anxious.
- Uncomfortable.

#### Number-9 : Avoiding Eye-Contact.

> In 2007 study, showed that people who maintain eye contact during a conversation, are often seen as more confident, attentive, intelligent and trustworthy.
> People that avoid eye contact are viewed as less sincere, more anxious and even unattractive.

#### Number-10 : Chewing Gum.
#### Number-11 : Keeping your hands in the wrong position.

If your are setting in front of group of people,

- Never keep your hand in pocket.
- You can keep your hand on your lap.

#### Number-12 : A weak handshake.

> In his research, psychologist `William F. Chaplin` found that people with a weak handshake are instantly judged as being  `shy`, `anxious`, `uninterested` or even `completely incompetent`.

- Do not hold another hand too long while handshaking.
- Take 2 second for handshaking.