# Activities-I

## Activity-1 : Watch Video Learn to unlearn: Navi Radjou at TEDx

<iframe width="450" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/TyMerf4mCIA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### How to learn to Unlearn

> At first `Navi Radjou` start with story of a student and Zen master.

From that we can understand that to learn new things we need to unlearn or empty our cup.

#### Context Around
Whenever the context around you changes, we need to unlearn let go of the old best practices.

#### What is Unlearning
> Unlearning is about challenging and changing not only what you do, which is your practices, how you do things and why you do things which is your perspective.

#### How to change your perspective
You cannot change your perspective with full cup or half cup, you need to empty  the full cup.

- To think in different way, like `Renault's`  CEO `Louis Schweitzer`.


### What I learned
Whenever the context around you changes, we need to unlearn let go of the old best practices.

---

## Activity-2 : Watch Video The first 20 hours -- how to learn anything | Josh Kaufman |

<iframe width="450" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5MgBikgcWnY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### How Long does it takes to acquire a new skill?
The answer my friend. 10,000 hours.
- The 10,000 hour rule came out of studies of expert-level performance.
> <span style="color:red;">Note</span> : It takes, 10,000 hours to reach the top of an ultra competitive field, not to become expert, not to become good at something, not to learn something.

It's not true that it takes 10,000 hours to learn something.

- People get good at things with little bit of practice

### How long does it takes from starting something to being reasonably good?
The answer my friend, 20 hours.

- If we put 20 hours of focused deliberate practice into that thing you will

### Four simple steps to rapid skill acquisition
1. Deconstruct the skill
	1. Look into the skill and break it down.
	2. The more you're able to break apart the skill the more you're able to decide.
	3. Decide what part of skill gives you what you want.
2. Learn enough to self-correct
	1. Get 3-5 resources about what it is you're trying to learn. But don't use those as a way to `procrastinate` on practice.
	2. Learn just enough that you can actually practice and self correct or self edit as you practice.
3. Remove practice barries
	1. Remove all the distraction that interupt your `practice`.
4. Practice at least 20 hours.

From this method `Josh Kaufman` learned how to play [ukulele](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ukulele)

### What I learned
It is only takes 20 hours to learn the basic of the skill, with proper way of learning and little bit interest to learn, we can learn the skill instead of making it as burden.
- Learn just enough that you can actually practice and self correct at start.


---
## Activity-3 : Go through 'Learning as Ontogenetic Adaptation' section of the paper

## Synchronous
Activities : [[sync-activities2]]