# Types of Inquiry

## Inquiry-Based learning

- Places the responsibility for `learning` on the  `learner`.
- Encourages them to arrive at an understanding of concept by themselves, following a process that can include.
	- Determining what they need to learn.
	- Identifying resources and how best to learn from them.
	- Using resources & reporting their learning.
	- Assessing their progress in learning.
- IBL (Inquiry-Based Learning) allows for the stimulation of both curiosity & interest & allows for the development of deeps & more profound understanding in the learner.

## 1. Structured Inquiry
- Faculty gives learner a question and outlines procedures that lead to an unknown result.
- Learners investigate and answer the question.
- Given that the end result is not known, the student has to formulate explanations and to prove | disprove them, analyze the collected data.
- Inquiry guided by the teacher.
- Student follow teacher's directions to come up with a specific end point or product.
- The teacher asks the class to discuss the results when the inquiry is complete.
- Therefore :
	- **Question** : Given by the teacher.
	- **Results** : Unknown
	- Procedure to be Followed | Method : Given by the teacher.
## 2. Controlled | Limited | Confirmation Inquiry

- The faculty gives learner a question and procedure that leads to a known result.
- Learners follow the directions.
- Reinforces concepts and confirms previous understandings.
- The student follows the procedure as detailed by the teacher, and then proceeds to collect and record data.
- Therefore:
	- **Question** : Given by the teacher.
	- **Results** : Known to the teacher.
	- Procedure to be followed | Method : Given by the teacher.

## 3. Guided Inquiry

- Teacher gives learners a question with an unknown answer
- Learners design procedures, investigate, and answer the question.
- Therefore:
	- **Question** : Given by the teacher.
	- **Results** : Unknown.
	- Procedure to be followed | Method : Devised by Students | Learners.
## 4. Free | Open Inquiry
- Learners design their own question(s) and procedures.
- They must investigate and answer the question.
- In this mode, students further formulate their own question as well as communicate their own results.
- Inquiry begins with the student's question.
- Complete the learning cycle by communicating the results.
- Therefore : 
	- **Question** : Formulated by the student.
	- **Results** : Unknown.
	- Procedure to be Followed | Method : Devised by Students | Learners.


## Sync-Activities
Activities : [[sync-activities4]]

## Asynchronous
Async : [[async-29-10-2021]]


